---
title: "Antenna decisions"
layout: post
description: "A multiband rig requires multiband antennas"
robots: none
---

One of the reasons that I liked the Yaesu is that it is an all-rounder,
spanning the most common amateur bands. But how do you get that
into the air?

I think more is written about antennas then about everything else
ham combined. The reason, of course, is that every antenna is some
compromise, and that in turn means that you have to think really
hard about what you want.

First of all is space. I rent a house, so big projects involving
concrete, mounting stuff on the roof, etcetera, is out. I wanted
something that doesn't go too high, because the higher you go, the
more likely you need to do permanent "damage" to your landlord's
property ;-).

Second, for me, is simplicity. The less hassle with antenna tuners
(the FC-30 on my transceiver only goes to a 3:1 SWR) the better,
and I certainly did not want to invest in an antenna tuner at this
time. One of the ideas of this hobby is to learn about electronics
so everything I'm doing with premade stuff is just a learning
experience - the real work is going to be done later using a soldering
iron and making the max of my advanced license (when I obtain it).

For VHF/UHF, it is actually quite simple - a trapped monopole will work
fine for the most used bandwidths but then I saw on Radioworld's website
a Discone by MFJ and I decided to risk it. Once I have that up, I have
a "good enough" transmission antenna for all high frequency bands and
a very fine wideband receiving antenna. After all, worst case all I 
need to get to is the nearest repeater.

For HF, I looked at a lot of antennas. Given that I didn't want to
build big installations, verticals and beams were out so I concentrated on 
wire antennas. I started looking at G5RV, which is trivial to build
but has mediocre SWR - certainly not good enough for my simple tuner. 

Next, I looked at all sort of dipoles - multiband, trapped, etcetera. This
was also the point where I started doing simulations (using 
[cocoaNEC](http://www.w7ay.net/site/Applications/cocoaNEC/)) and I quickly
discovered that a dipole that isn't high enough radiates mostly upward. I 
think that, over Toronto, the clouds are already warm enough :-)

After some more digging I landed on an interesting design by
[G7FEK](http://www.g7fek.co.uk/blogus/newsshow.php?page=80m_Antenna_for_small_gar_49493).
I have a small backyard (well, probably large for Toronto), and it
fit mine perfectly. Also, it is quite simple to build and has decent
SWR on most bands. However, it wants to be decently high, and -
being basically a monopole - needs a good groundplane. My girlfriend
maintains the backyard, and I had my doubt about installing radials
everywhere.

I was about to give up and buy an antenna tuner when I re-opened an
article I read months ago and then put away. It discusses the
[Balanced Termination Folded Dipole](http://www.packetradio.com/t2fd.htm) and
it pretty much just what I wanted. More below. 

So - plans. I'll buy a fiberglass telescoping pole and tripod, mount the
Discone on top, hang the T2FD off it, and then I should be able to cover
pretty much all bands. 

The T2FD
--------

Some people will probably tell me that I rejected a cloudwarmer and
decided upon a resistor warmer instead. However, I want to make some 
points about why I think it's a decent option:

* It has a low take-off angle even when mounted low-ish, without a good
groundplane, etcetera. So setting it up in a restricted backyard looks
less problematic. 
* The very low SWR means that I can go out on all bands without having
to worry about tuning. When learning the ropes, I think that'll prove
useful.
* Low SWR means low reflected power and thus low loss. The loss here
goes into the resistor (but less so the higher you go in frequency), but 
that is way more predictable than reflection losses in your transmission
line, etcetera. At least, that's what I think ;-). 

The T2FD requires a high-ratio balun (higher seems to be better) and a
resistance that can dump a lot of power. I decided that building these
items would be too cumbersome so I bought them from [BuxComm](http://www.packetradio.com/)
ready-made. With shipping to Canada, the two parts are around $100 which 
I think is an ok investment for an antenna. 

Needless to say, I'm eager to start building this stuff and get on the air!

